Overhangs, Caves, and Roofs: Steep Climbing Techniques

An overhang is a rock face or artificial climbing wall with a slope of more than 90 degrees, i.e. it slopes beyond the vertical.  Very steep routes are often
called caves, and articularly severe overhangs that reach, or nearly reach, the horizontal, are referred to as a roof.  In climbing, overhangs and especially roofs
place special demands both in terms of technique and equipment as well as the constitution of the athlete. With increasing steepness of an overhang the loading on arm
and hand muscles increases, because the feet can support less of the body weight. Rest points where the muscles can be relaxed, especially no-hands rests, are rarely
found in overhangs. Climbing techniques to tackle overhangs include high body tension and exacting body placement. The athleticism makes overhanging routes very difficult, but fun too.  Many
climbing techniques such as heelhooks and toehooks are almost exclusively used in overhangs and roofs. In modern sport climbing, severely overhanging terrain is no
longer a rarity because climbing gyms frequently include overhangs and roofs.  Rock that is overhanging is often called steep or past veritcal.  

There are a variety of different kinds of overhang climbs.  The least steep type of overhangs are only slightly past vertical.  This sort of overhang - slightly
overhanging - nevertheless put more weight on your hands than other types of climbs.  As such, footwork and technique is very important to avoid getting pumped out
on overhanging routes.  Being pumped happens when lactic acid builds up in your muscles.  Overhanging routes that are horizontal or nearly horizontal are called
roofs.  Horizontal roofs, super steeps, and overhangs are among the most intimidating features in climbing. A ticking pump clock, acrobatic moves, and increased
exposure make this type of terrain feel imposing. Prepare for horizontal movement when tackling overhang routes, roofs, and caves.  The possibilities for getting
very pumped are more pronounced here.  A third type of overhanging route is the cave route.  Cave routes 

There are a variety of techniques that make overhanging, steep, roof, or cave climbing routes easier and avoid getting pumped.  First, climb on your Skeleton. 
Overhanging climbing is hard work and tiring. You need to reduce the stress on your muscles by letting your skeleton hold as much of your body weight as possible.
Keep your arms straight and your muscles relaxed, don't try and hold yourself against the rock.  Second, use your shoulders/Twist your body when you reach
overhanging terrain in order to make better use of your skeleton.  Foot work is even more important on overhanging terrain, so keep your feet up.  Don't let your feet fall behind your hands. If you're too
stretched out you will swing away from the wall and you'll have to pull hard to get back on it. You want your knees bent most of the time. Use your feet to hold weight.
You can't expect your hands to hold your entire body weight for an extended period of time. You need your feet to hold as much of your weight as possible. To do this
you need to tense your core. This requires core strength(stomach/back) which may take some time to build. You also may need to use techniques such as heel hooks and
toe hooks. The idea being that your feet are working to actively hold you against the wall rather than simply being along for the ride!  Heelhooks and toehooks help
to use your heels and toes to keep you on the wall.  Flagging your feet out will also help keep you on the wall.  Try not to cut feet when possible.  Cutting feet is
the act of taking one or both feet off the wall and letting them hang, exposed in the air.

Resting is important on overhang routes, especially if you can make use of no-hands rests or kneebars.  These are great places to shake out the pump when climbing roofs
or caves because they take weight off your hands.  Another overhang-specific feature is the dyno - a dynamic move that involves cutting feet and jumping to the next
hold.

overhung overhung overhung overhung overhung cave cave cave cave cave roof roof roof roof roof
